Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
Vol. 95, pp. 1189111896, September 1998
Medical Sciences

Aberrant methylation of p16INK4a is an early event in lung cancer
and a potential biomarker for early diagnosis

(p16 methylationysputumyNNKysquamous cell carcinoma)

STEVEN A. BELINSKY*, KRISTEN J. NIKULA*, WILLIAM A. PALMISANO*, RUTH MICHELS, GENO SACCOMANNO,
EDWARD GABRIELSON, STEPHEN B. BAYLIN, AND JAMES G. HERMAN
*Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Lung Cancer Program, P.O. Box 5890, Albuquerque, NM 87185; St. Marys Hospital, 2635 North 7th, Grand Junction,
CO 81501; and Johns Hopkins University Medical Institutions, The Johns Hopkins Comprehensive Cancer Center, 424 North Bond Street, Baltimore, MD 21231

Communicated by Philip Hanawalt, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, July 29, 1998 (received for review January 9, 1998)

The p16INK4a (p16) tumor suppressor gene
ABSTRACT
can be inactivated by promoter region hypermethylation in
many tumor types including lung cancer, the leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the U.S. We have determined the
timing of this event in an animal model of lung carcinogenesis
and in human squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs). In the rat,
94% of adenocarcinomas induced by the tobacco specific
carcinogen 4-methylnitrosamino-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone
were hypermethylated at the p16 gene promoter; most impor-
tant, this methylation change was frequently detected in
precursor lesions to the tumors: adenomas, and hyperplastic
lesions. The timing for p16 methylation was recapitulated in
human SCCs where the p16 gene was coordinately methylated
in 75% of carcinoma in situ lesions adjacent to SCCs harboring
this change. Moreover, the frequency of this event increased
during disease progression from basal cell hyperplasia (17%)
to squamous metaplasia (24%) to carcinoma in situ (50%)
lesions. Methylation of p16 was associated with loss of expres-
sion in both tumors and precursor lesions indicating that both
alleles were functionally inactivated. The potential of using
assays for aberrant p16 methylation to identify disease andyor
risk was validated by detection of this change in sputum from
three of seven patients with cancer and 5 of 26 cancer-free
individuals at high risk. These studies show for the first time
that an epigenetic alteration, aberrant methylation of the p16
gene, can be an early event in lung cancer and may constitute
a new biomarker for early detection and monitoring of pre-
vention trials.

The p16INK4a (p16) tumor suppressor gene that maps to
chromosome band 9p21, is inactivated in .70% of cell lines
derived from all histologic types of human nonsmall cell lung
cancers (NSCLCs) (1, 2) predominantly through homozygous
deletion (1) or in association with aberrant promoter region
hypermethylation (3). These inactivating events are conserved
across species, with homozygous deletion and aberrant meth-
ylation accounting for loss of p16 expression in 40% and 45%,
respectively, of cell lines derived from rat lung tumors (4).
Moreover, the methylated phenotype seen in the rat cell lines
showed an absolute correlation with the detection of methyl-
ation in primary tumors and the aberrant promoter region
methylation was also detected in four of eight primary tumors
from which the derived cell line had homozygous deletion of
p16 (4). Thus, the methylation change may precede genetic
instability within the CpG island of this gene.

Several genetic abnormalities frequently present in human
lung cancer have now been found throughout the respiratory
tract of smokers (57). These include allelic loss, but not

homozygous deletion, involving 9p21 in premalignant lesions
from cancer and cancer-free patients (6, 7). This finding
suggests that inactivation of the p16 gene by aberrant meth-
ylation could represent a critical step in the genesis of NSCLC
by allowing the uncontrolled clonal expansion of some of these
premalignant lesions to cancer. The present investigation
addresses this issue by defining when aberrant methylation of
the p16 gene occurs during the development of lung carcinoma
in an animal model, then extends these studies to the devel-
opment of human squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). The find-
ings link aberrant methylation of p16 to the earliest stages of
respiratory carcinogenesis and demonstrate the potential use
of this epigenetic change as a biomarker to identify persons at
high risk or with lung neoplasia.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Human and Rodent Tissue Samples. SCC and precursor
lesions that included carcinoma in situ (CIS), squamous cell
metaplasia with varying degree of atypia, and basal cell
hyperplasia were obtained at surgical resection from patients
at either Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions (Baltimore, MD)
or St. Marys Hospital (Grand Junction, CO). In addition,
biopsy samples were obtained through bronchoscopy of pa-
tients at St. Marys Hospital being evaluated for lung cancer.
Sputum was collected by standardized procedures (8) from
patients at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions being evaluated
for possible lung cancer through referral from their primary
care physician. Sputum was considered unsatisfactory for
evaluation if alveolar lung macrophages were absent or if a
marked inflammatory component was present that diluted the
concentration of pulmonary epithelial cells. Adenocarcinomas
and precursor lesions, adenomas and alveolar hyperplasias,
were induced in F344yN rats by treatment with 4-methylni-
trosamino-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) 3 times a week (50
mgykg, i.p.) for 20 weeks (9). Alveolar type II cells (purity
.80%) were isolated from vehicle-treated rats by protease
digestion and centrifugal elutriation (9).

Microdissection of Tumors and Precursor Lesions. Human
SCCs and precursor lesions were obtained by three different
sampling strategies: (i) CIS lesions sharing the same airway and
adjacent to the SCC; (ii) CIS, squamous metaplasia with
varying degree of cellular atypia, and basal cell hyperplasia
found in either different airways or at different bronchial
generations from the primary SCC at the time of lobe resec-
tion; and (iii) CIS, squamous metaplasia, and basal cell hy-
perplasia obtained by bronchoscopy independent of any tu-

The publication costs of this article were defrayed in part by page charge
payment. This article must therefore be hereby marked advertisement in
accordance with 18 U.S.C. 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
 1998 by The National Academy of Sciences 0027-8424y98y9511891-6$2.00y0
PNAS is available online at www.pnas.org.

Abbreviations: SCC, squamous cell carcinoma; CIS, carcinoma in situ;
p16, p16INK4a; SCLC, small cell lung cancer; NSCLC, nonsmall cell
lung cancer; NNK, 4-methylnitrosamino-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone;
Rb, retinoblastoma; NFP, neutral buffered formalin; MSP, methyla-
tion-specific PCR.
To whom all reprint requests should be addressed.

11891

11892 Medical Sciences: Belinsky et al.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 (1998)

mor. Lung lobes obtained at resection and biopsies were fixed
by perfusion or immersion in neutral buffered formalin (NFB),
respectively. A portion of each lung tumor induced by NNK
was frozen in liquid nitrogen and the remaining tumor and
lung tissue fixed in NBF. All lung lobes from the treated rats
were perfused with NBF, embedded in paraffin; 5-mm sections
were cut, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin to identify
precursor lesions. Lung lobes obtained from patients under-
going resection were sampled as follows. The lung tissue
surrounding the tumor was sampled extending in all directions
toward the periphery of the lung lobe. Approximately eight
separate pieces of tissues were embedded in paraffin, sec-
tioned, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin to identify
precursor lesions. Lung lesions were classified based on World
Health Organization criteria. Sequential sections from biop-
sies and lesions identified in resections were cut (510 mm),
deparaffinized, and stained with toluidine blue to facilitate
dissection. A 25-gauge needle attached to a tuberculin syringe
was used to remove the lesions under a dissecting microscope.
Because of the extensive contamination of some lesions with
normal tissue (e.g., SCC, adenoma, alveolar hyperplasia) or
the small size of some lesions, ,0.001 mm3, it was essential to
include normal appearing cells to ensure that after bisulfite
modification and column clean-up of the DNA template
enough sample remained to conduct the methylation-specific
PCR (MSP) assay as described below. Occasionally where the
lesion was pure, of substantial size (.500 cells), and easily
dissected from the basement membrane (e.g., CIS), it was
possible to microdissect only the lesion itself. Thus, because the
goal of the study was to determine whether p16 methylation
was present in these lesions and not to quantitate methylation
levels, microdissection was used to enrich the samples being
examined for tumor or premalignant cells. Adenocarcinomas
induced by NNK were not microdissected from fixed tissue,
rather the frozen tissue that was comprised of tumor cells and
normal appearing cells was used for analysis.

Nucleic Acid Isolation and Methylation-Specific PCR. DNA
was isolated from frozen tumors and sputum by digestion with
Pronase in 1% SDS, followed by standard phenol-chloroform
extraction and ethanol precipitation. DNA was prepared from
microdissected tissue by the method of Levi et al. (10).

The methylation state of the p16 gene was determined by the
recently developed method of MSP (4, 11). Briefly, in MSP,
genomic DNA is modified by treatment with sodium bisulfite,
which converts all unmethylated cytosines to uracil, then to
thymidine during the subsequent PCR step. Before PCR, the
modified DNA is purified with the Wizard DNA purification
system (Promega), desulfonated with NaOH, precipitated with
ethanol, and finally resuspended in a Tris-EDTA buffer. Two
sets of primers are used to amplify each region of interest: one
pair recognizes a sequence in which CpG sites are unmethyl-
ated (bisulfite modified to UpG), and the other recognizes a
sequence in which CpG sites are methylated (unmodified by
bisulfite). Primers are localized to regions containing frequent
cytosines (to distinguish unmodified from modified DNA),
and CpG pairs near the 39 end of the primers provide maximal
discrimination in the PCR reaction between methylated and
unmethylated DNA. Primer sequences have been described (4,
11) and were localized to regions in and around the transcrip-
tion start site of the p16 gene, a region shown to correlate with
loss of gene expression (4, 11). PCR amplification was per-
formed by using 150300 ng of treated DNA as the template.
Two sets of primers were used at the same position, one set
specific for DNA methylated at CpG sites, and one for fully
unmethylated DNA. After bisulfite treatment, double-
stranded DNA is no longer complementary, so the primer
pairs designed amplified only the modified sense strand. PCR
conditions have been described (4, 11). Forty cycles of ampli-
fication were used in analysis of modified DNA from micro-
dissected samples for p16 methylation. Negative controls were

performed by using both sets of modified primers with un-
treated DNA, to confirm that unmodified DNA could not be
amplified in the event of incomplete bisulfite reactions. Prod-
ucts were visualized on 2.0% agarose gels or 6% nondenatur-
ing acrylamide gels. When the amount of DNA was not
limiting (tumors and sputum samples), assays were repeated
beginning with the bisulfite step. Otherwise, PCR reactions
were generally conducted in duplicate on each modified DNA
template.

The MSP method has several advantages over that of
conventional Southern hybridization. (i) Small amounts of
DNA template can be used (,200 ng) compared with mg
quantities of DNA needed for Southern hybridization and is
thus amenable to using DNA obtained from fixed tissue. (ii)
Because primers are designed that recognize either methylated
or unmethylated alleles, contaminating normal tissue does not
interfere with the ability to detect methylation. (iii) The
sensitivity of this assay to detect methylated alleles in a
background of unmethylated alleles is .1024 (11) that makes
it ideal for identifying cells containing methylated alleles in a
heterogeneous population of cells like those present in sputum.
However, it is important to recognize that the MSP method is
not intended to provide quantitative information on methyl-
ation of a particular gene, but is a extremely sensitive assay for
detecting methylation in the presence of contaminating normal
tissue.

Immunohistochemistry for Detecting p16 Protein. Tissue
sections (45 microns) were deparaffinized and incubated in
Antigen Retrieval Citra (BioGenex Laboratories, San Ramon,
CA) at the recommended dilution and heated by steam for 30
min. Slides were incubated overnight at 4C with mouse
monoclonal anti-p16 (Neomarkers, Union City, CA) diluted to
a final concentration of 4 mgyml. Slides were then rinsed and
incubated with universal secondary antibody containing goat
anti-mouse IgG (Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, AZ) for
30 min, developed with diaminobenzadine (Ventana Medical
Systems) for 20 min, and counterstained with hematoxylin for
1 min.

RESULTS

Methylation of p16 in NNK-Induced Lung Lesions. The
development of pulmonary adenocarcinomas induced by NNK
progress from focal hyperplasias of type II alveolar epithelial
cells to adenomas and finally to carcinomas (9). The current
study used a new sensitive PCR procedure (11), MSP, to
examine the methylation state of the p16 gene in whole lung
and type II cells from sham-exposed rats and in hyperplasias,
adenomas, and carcinomas from rats treated with NNK. Only
unmethylated p16 alleles were detected by MSP in whole lung
and alveolar type II cells (Fig. 1) from sham-exposed rats.
Methylation of the p16 gene was detected in 15 of 16 adeno-
carcinomas, 4 of 6 adenomas, and 17 of 20 hyperplasias (see
Fig. 1 for representative results). Unmethylated alleles were
also simultaneously detected in these samples, because tumors
and adenomas were contaminated with stromal and inflam-
matory cells, or normal cells in the case of the epithelial
hyperplasias. Photomicrographs (Fig. 2 AC) illustrate the
morphologic features of the precursor lesions containing
methylated p16 alleles. The adenomas exhibited minimal
atypia and contained large numbers of neutrophils and mac-
rophages within their luminal spaces and stroma. Epithelial
hyperplasias were focal, consisted of a single layer of epithelial
cells without atypia lining the septa, and did not disrupt the
normal alveolar architecture.

Methylation of p16 Is an Early Event in the Development of
Human SCC. Examination of SCCs obtained by biopsy or
through lobectomy revealed a marked propensity toward
methylation of the p16 gene, with 11 of 18 of these randomly
selected neoplasms showing this change (see Fig. 3B for

Medical Sciences: Belinsky et al.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 (1998)

11893

FIG. 1. Detection of p16 methylation in hyperplasias, adenomas, and adenocarcinomas induced by NNK in the rat. Methylation is evident in
hyperplasias from lanes 15 and 7, in adenomas from lanes 911 and 14, and in adenocarcinomas from lanes 1525. Unmethylated p16 alleles were
present in all lesions due to contaminating normal tissue and in normal lung and alveolar type II cells. No methylated alleles are detected in modified
DNA from normal lung (lanes 8 and 26) or alveolar type II cells (lane 27).

representative results). Thus, the high incidence of p16 hyper-
methylation makes this histologic form of NSCLC ideally
suited for defining the timing for this change in the progression
of human respiratory carcinogenesis. Human SCC (12) is
thought to arise through a series of morphologic changes
beginning with basal cell hyperplasia, leading to squamous
metaplasia characterized by increasing severity of cellular
atypia (dyplasia) to CIS, and ultimately to SCC. The first series
of samples examined for p16 methylation were CIS lesions
adjacent to SCCs. Ten of twelve sample pairs examined
showed an absolute concordance, being either both methylated
(six pairs) or unmethylated (four pairs) at the p16 locus (Fig.
3A). Moreover, in two pairs where the CIS lesion was precisely
microdissected excluding the basal lamina and normal appear-

ing cells, only methylated p16 alleles were detected by MSP
(Fig. 3A) substantiating the clonal nature of the change. The
normal appearing bronchus adjacent to one of these SCCs also
contained methylated p16 alleles, while normal lymphocytes
within the field did not. In the two pairs with discordant results,
one CIS lesion was methylated and the adjacent SCC unmeth-
ylated, while the other CIS lesion was unmethylated and the
adjacent SCC methylated. These latter two pairs illustrate that
some SCCs can arise via pathways that either exclude the p16
gene or inactivate this gene via homozygous deletion.

The status of p16 was further characterized in lesions in
airways from lobectomy cases or in biopsies obtained through
bronchoscopy from persons undergoing evaluation for lung
cancer. The eight biopsies collected were independent from
any malignancy that was ultimately diagnosed and were com-
prised of CIS, squamous metaplasia with varying degree of
atypia, and hyperplastic epithelium. Thirteen SCCs, six of
which harbored the p16 methylation change, premalignant
lesions, and CIS were also obtained from 13 persons under-
going lobectomies. In these surgical specimens, most prema-
lignant lesions examined were from either different airways or
at different bronchial generations from those harboring the
primary SCC identified at the time of lobe resection. Three of
the lesions arose from the same airway and same generation as

FIG. 2. Rat and human lesions with p16 methylation. (A) Focal
epithelial hyperplasia in the lung of a rat treated with NNK. Note the
small size of the lesion and the lack of disruption of the normal alveolar
architecture. (B) Higher magnification of the lesion in A. (C) Ade-
noma in the lung of an NNK-treated rat. The epithelial cells exhibit
minimal atypia. Note the large number of neutrophils and macro-
phages within the luminal spaces and in the stroma (arrow points to
one luminal aggregate of inflammatory cells). (D) Minimal basal cell
hyperplasia of the bronchial epithelium in a human biopsy specimen.
Note the normal appearing ciliated surface. (E) Squamous metaplasia
with minimal atypia of the bronchial epithelium in a section obtained
at lobectomy. This patient had a SCC distant from this site at the time
of lobectomy. (F) Squamous metaplasia with moderate atypia of the
bronchial epithelium obtained at lobectomy. This patient also had a
SCC distant from this site at the time of lobectomy. (G) CIS of the
bronchial epithelium in a human biopsy specimen.

FIG. 3. Methylation of p16 in premalignant lesions, CIS, and SCC.
(A) Lymphocytes microdissected from in and around the SCC con-
stituted the normal (N) tissue for analysis. Other areas analyzed
included normal appearing bronchus (NB) within the cancer field,
adjacent CIS, and SCC obtained from three patients. (B) Precursor
lesions and SCCs obtained through biopsy or lobectomy from several
different cases. Lesions microdissected included basal cell hyperplasia
(Hyper), squamous metaplasia (Meta), CIS, and SCC. Cell lines H249
and U172 serve as positive controls for detecting unmethylated (U)
and methylated (M) p16 alleles, respectively by MSP. A PCR product
of the appropriate molecular weight (151 bp for U, 150 bp for M)
indicates the presence of unmethylated andyor methylated p16 alleles
in that sample.

11894 Medical Sciences: Belinsky et al.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 (1998)

the SCC. Thirty-five premalignant or CIS lesions were exam-
ined from the two collections. Methylation of p16 (see Fig. 3B
for representative results and Fig. 4 for summary of all results)
was detected in 3 of 6 CISs (50%) and in 4 of 17 (24%)
squamous metaplasias with minimal to moderate atypia (Fig.
2 DG). The frequency of p16 methylation appeared less
frequent in lower grade lesions being present in 2 of 12 (17%)
lesions exhibiting minimal basal cell hyperplasia with a normal
appearing ciliated surface (Fig. 2D and 3B). In contrast to the
findings for CIS adjacent to established SCC, there was no
apparent relationship between the methylation status of the
cancers and the precursor lesions within the lobectomy cases.
In total, at least one lesion was methylated at the p16 locus in
10 of the 13 lobectomies examined.

Protein Levels for p16 Correlate with Methylation Status in
SCCs and Precursor Lesions. The relationship between p16
methylation and expression was assessed through immunohis-
tochemical analysis of 13 SCCs and 7 precursor lesions. There
was concordance between methylation status and the detec-
tion of protein in 18 of 20 samples. The two disconcordant
samples, a SCC and adjacent CIS, were both unmethylated, but
did not express any p16 protein. This lack of expression is most
likely due to homozygous deletion of the p16 gene, a mecha-
nism observed in primary lung tumors (13) and derived cell
lines (1). Thus, in all other samples, methylation of the p16
gene was associated with loss of p16 protein, while the opposite
was observed in unmethylated lesions. Fig. 5 depicts some of
the staining patterns observed. In a squamous metaplasia that
was unmethylated at the p16 locus (Fig. 5A), 60% of the
epithelial cell nuclei were positive for p16 protein. In contrast,
complete lack of p16 staining was observed in a squamous
metaplasia (Fig. 5B) that was methylated. All five of the SCCs
in which no methylation of the p16 gene was detected showed
abundant expression of the protein (Fig. 5C), a finding con-
sistent with our previous studies demonstrating an apparent
overexpression of this gene in tumors (14) or cell lines (4)
where no methylation was detected. In four of seven methyl-
ated SCCs there was a complete absence of the p16 protein
(Fig. 5D). However, in some tumors, small focal areas of cells
stained for the protein, a pattern also observed by Kratze et al.
(15).

Detection of Aberrant p16 Methylation in Exfoliated Cells
Within Sputum. Premalignant cells shed from the airways or
malignant cells from carcinomas can be recovered after spu-

FIG. 4. Summary of the frequency for p16 methylation in prema-
lignant lesions, CIS, SCC, and sputum samples. The frequency (ex-
pressed as a percentage) for detecting p16 methylation is depicted for
basal cell hyperplasia (Hyper), squamous metaplasia (Meta), CIS,
SCC, and in sputum from cancer-free smokers and lung cancers.
Above the bar graphs the total number of positive samples per total
sample population for a specific lesion or population is indicated.

FIG. 5.

Immunohistochemistry to detect p16 protein in human lung
lesions. (A) Immunohistochemical detection of p16 protein (brown
nuclear staining) in an area of bronchiolar squamous metaplasia. (B)
Lack of detectable p16 protein in an area of bronchiolar squamous
metaplasia with marked atypia. (C) Strong nuclear p16 immunostain-
ing in a SCC. (D) Lack of p16 protein in a SCC.

tum induction. Thus, detecting aberrant methylation of p16 in
these cells from radiographically cancer-free persons could be
a biomarker for impending disease. This hypothesis was tested
by analysis of sputum collected without prior knowledge of
their medical history from 33 persons who smoked. Methylated
p16 alleles were detected in DNA isolated from sputum of
eight people (see Fig. 6 for representative results and Fig. 4 for
summary of results). In contrast, no methylated p16 alleles
were present in DNA from normal human bronchial epithelial
cells obtained through bronchoscopy from three never smok-
ers (see Fig. 6 for representative results). Three persons
positive for p16 methylation were diagnosed with lung cancer
at the time of sputum collection. The three tumors were
classified as SCC, NSCLC (histology not specified), and a small
cell lung cancer (SCLC). Cytologic examination of the sputum
from the SCC and NSCLC cases revealed SCC cells and
atypical cells, respectively, and the intensity of the signal for
methylated p16 alleles was greatest from these two samples
(one is shown in Fig. 4) compared with all other positive
sputum samples. The marked difference in intensity of the
methylated product between the eight positive sputum samples
was not unexpected due to the fact that tumors located in the
airways should exfoliate a relatively high number of cells,
while the number of cells recovered in sputum from prema-
lignant lesions harboring methylated alleles will vary consid-
erably depending on the size and location of the lesion(s)
within the lung. Cytology of the sputum from the patient with
SCLC was ruled unsatisfactory due to the absence of alveolar
macrophages; the fact that this person was diagnosed with a
second tumor (NSCLC) 2 years after collection of the sputum
analyzed was significant. In the five cancer-free cases that were
positive for p16 methylation, cytology was classified as: (i)
moderate atypia, (ii) marked atypical cells and suspicious for
malignancy, (iii) negative, (iv) unsatisfactory, and (v) squa-
mous metaplasia. The person with unsatisfactory cytology
developed a SCLC 1 year later.

Four persons whose sputum was negative for p16 methyl-
ation had lung cancer at the time of sputum induction.
However, only one of these tumors, a SCC, was diagnosed by
sputum cytology. The 21 remaining persons whose sputum was
negative for p16 methylation were classified by sputum cytol-
ogy as negative in 14 persons, unsatisfactory in 5 persons, and

Medical Sciences: Belinsky et al.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 (1998)

11895

FIG. 6. Methylation of p16 in sputum from smokers. Bisulfite modified DNA was amplified by primers specific to methylated or unmethylated
alleles of the p16 gene as described. Unmethylated p16 alleles were detected in all 16 sputum samples and in DNA from normal human bronchial
epithelial (NHBE) cells obtained from a never-smoker. The Calu1 cell line (positive control for p16 methylation) is completely methylated.
Methylated alleles of p16 were observed in DNA from 4 cancer-free persons (lanes 3, 10, 13, and 14), 1 person diagnosed at the time of sputum
induction with a SCLC (lane 2) who developed a NSCLC 2 years later, 1 smoker (lane 15) who was positive for lung cancer at the time of sputum
induction, and in the positive control (Calu1). No methylation was observed in the negative control normal human bronchial epithelial cells. Samples
negative for p16 methylation are shown in lanes 1, 49, 1112, and 16.

marked atypia in 2 persons. Thus, classifying persons as cancer
free was based on sputum cytology that appeared negative for
malignant cells and a negative chest x-ray. Based on current
hospital records, no additional lung tumors have been seen in
this group of subjects over a follow-up period of 3 years since
sputum collection.

DISCUSSION

This investigation demonstrates for the first time that inacti-
vation of the p16 tumor suppressor gene by aberrant methyl-
ation is an early and likely critical event in the development of
NSCLC. Furthermore, consistent with the timing of this
epigenetic alteration in the genesis of NSCLC, p16 methylation
was detected in epithelial cells shed from the airways of some
persons at risk for lung cancer. Thus, the detection of p16
methylation in sputum could represent a new biomarker for
early detection of respiratory neoplasia and a target for
intervention strategies.

The fact that hypermethylation of the p16 gene is likely an
essential step for the evolution of many NSCLCs is substan-
tiated by our results and others. Functional inactivation of the
p16 gene in both tumors and precursor lesions was evident
based on loss of p16 protein. Moreover, in the majority of
samples examined, loss of expression appeared to be homog-
enous, substantiating the clonal nature of the methylation
event. Our studies did not attempt to elucidate whether loss of
p16 function was due to methylation of both alleles or a
combination of methylation and allelic loss. Both mechanisms
have been documented (3). Several studies have corroborated
our findings in tumors that methylation of the p16 gene is
clearly associated with loss of gene transcription (3, 4, 16).
Furthermore, the selective advantage of this epigenetic event
for the loss of function of the cyclin D-retinoblastoma pathway
in lung tumors appears to be identical to that for either
homozygous deletion of p16 or retinoblastoma mutations.
Thus, retinoblastoma mutations are common in SCLC, while
p16 mutations or hypermethylation are rare; the opposite is
true in NSCLC (2, 3, 17).

A pivotal role for p16 methylation in the earliest stages of
lung cancer is further substantiated by our finding of a high
frequency for this change in alveolar hyperplasias and adeno-
mas from NNK-treated rats. These precursor lesions have an
extremely high conversion rate to adenocarcinomas in this
carcinogenesis model (9). Our findings of p16 methylation in
the putative stages for progression of human SCC also support
a critical role for this molecular change in human cancer. The
frequency for p16 methylation increased from the lowest to
highest grade precursor lesions to SCC. Strikingly, the 50%
incidence of p16 methylation in CIS, the precursor lesion
thought to have the strongest likelihood of developing into
SCC, paralleled findings in established SCCs. The strong

concordance between SCCs and adjacent CIS lesions for p16
methylation is also consistent with an important role for p16
inactivation in tumor progression within a single site. The lack
of concordance for p16 status between the SCCs and prema-
lignant lesions at sites distant to the tumor is consistent with
the epigenetic and genetic autonomy of multiple tumors in the
same patient (18).

The detection of p16 methylation in exfoliated cells within
sputum from cancer-free smokers reaffirms the involvement of
this genetic change in early respiratory carcinogenesis. Hyper-
methylation of p16 has not been reported in normal tissue from
unexposed individuals (3) and was not evident in normal
human bronchial epithelial cells or peripheral lymphocytes
(19), two of the major cell types within sputum. Direct
comparison of sputum from current or former smokers to
never smokers is technically difficult because never smokers
produce very little sputum and the composition of the sample
could also differ from that of a current or former smoker. The
best control for our study was in fact sputum samples negative
for p16 methylation. If a low background for methylation of
this gene existed in normal lung tissue, it should have been
detected by MSP in the majority of the sputum samples, and
this was not the case. Further support for the lack of p16
alterations in never smokers is provided by studies of loss of
heterozygosity by Wistuba et al. (6) and Mao et al. (7). These
studies examined .100 biopsies from 30 never smokers and
found no evidence for loss of heterozygosity at the 9p21 locus
where the p16 gene is located. This was in marked contrast to
the frequent detection of allelic loss at this locus in biopsies
from current and former smokers. Thus,
it is likely that
exfoliated cells from premalignant lesions or from established
tumors within airways of persons at high risk for NSCLC
account for the presence of the hypermethylated alleles in the
positive sputum samples. The finding in one individual diag-
nosed with SCLC and positive for p16 hypermethylation in the
sputum at the time of diagnosis is particularly interesting
because the p16 gene is rarely inactivated in this tumor type (2,
3, 17). However, this individual was diagnosed with a separate
NSCLC 2 years later, thus the methylation detected in sputum
likely stemmed from cells exfoliated by the NSCLC or the
precursor lesion from which it arose.

The association of p16 gene hypermethylation with early
stages of NSCLC and the detection of this change in sputum
of patients at high risk for developing lung cancer create some
exciting possibilities for approaching risk assessment, early
detection, and prevention of this disease. However, several
important relationships must be clarified in future studies. The
exact relationship between the presence of the p16 methylation
change and the risk for lung cancer must be established. After
smoking cessation, molecular markers presumably indicative
of high risk, such as loss of heterozygosity at chromosome loci
commonly found in lung cancers (6, 7), are still detected at high

11896 Medical Sciences: Belinsky et al.

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95 (1998)

frequency in people with putative precursor lesions. Individ-
uals with such changes do remain at an elevated risk for
development of lung cancer (20). However, it is apparent that
many lesions dispersed throughout the lungs of current smok-
ers regress after smoking cessation (21). It will be critical to
determine the relationship between p16 hypermethylation and
the reversibility of these premalignant lesions. This informa-
tion may emerge from monitoring individuals having p16
methylation changes in sputum, but who stop smoking. If
reversible, the detection of p16 methylation in sputum could be
an excellent intermediate biomarker to monitor the efficacy of
intervention therapy in high-risk, cancer-free persons.

P16 methylation changes in sputum could also prove invalu-
able as a marker for early detection, risk assessment, and
monitoring clinical course. The MSP assay used in the present
study detects methylation of p16 in 1 in 105 cells by primers
designed to amplify only methylated alleles (9). Sputum cy-
tology requires a skilled cytopathologist, while immunohisto-
chemical methods to detect other markers (22, 23) rely on
subtle differences in nuclear staining of cells often obscured by
mucous. In fact, in the present study, three cases are described
where cytology was either negative or unsatisfactory, yet p16
hypermethylation was still detected. The impact of detecting
p16 methylation in exfoliated cells from cancer-free smokers as
a prognostic indicator will only be realized in prospective
studies, but clearly this molecular change could provide a key
biomarker for early detection and clinical trials in lung cancer.

We thank Susan Middleton and Elma Perez for excellent technical
assistance. The use of tissue samples was approved by the Joint
Committee on Clinical Investigation of Johns Hopkins Medical Insti-
tutions and St. Marys Hospital in accordance with the policies of the
Department of Health and Human Services. All patients gave in-
formed consent for the use of their tissue samples. This research was
sponsored by the Office of Health and Biological Research, U.S.
Department of Energy under cooperative agreement DE-FC04-
96AL76406 and by National Institutes of Health Grant 5P50CA58184
in facilities fully accredited by the American Association of Laboratory
Animal Care. J.G.H. is also a V Foundation Scholar. S.B.B. and J.G.H.
receive research funding and are entitled to sales royalties from Oncor,
who is developing products related to research described in this paper.
The terms of this arrangement have been reviewed and approved by
the Johns Hopkins University in accordance with its conflict of interest
policies.

1. Kamb, A., Guis, N. A., Weaver-Feldhaus, J., Liu, Q., Harshman,
K. Tavtigian, S. V., Stockert, E., Day, R. S., III, Johnson, B. E.
& Skolnick, M. H. (1994) Science 8, 436440.

2. Otterson, G. A., Kratze, R. A., Coxon, A., Kim, Y. W. & Kaye,

F. J. (1994) Oncogene 9, 33753378.

3. Merlo, A., Herman, J. G., Mao, L., Lee, D. J., Gabrielson, E.,
Burger, P. C., Baylin, S. B. & Sidransky, D. (1995) Nat. Med. 1(7),
686692.

4. Swafford, D. S., Middleton, S. K., Palmisano, W. A., Nikula, K. J.,
Tesfaigzi, J., Baylin, S. B., Herman, J. G. & Belinsky, S. A. (1997)
Mol. Cell. Biol. 17, 13661374.

5. Crowell, R. E., Gilliland, F. D., Temes, R. T., Harms, H. J., Neft,
R. E., Heaphy, E., Auckley, D. H., Crooks, L. A., Jordan, S. W.,
Samet, J. M., et al. (1996) Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 5,
631637.

6. Wistuba, I. I., Lam, S., Behrens, C., Virmani, A. K., Fong, K. M.,
LeRiche, J., Samet, J. M., Srivastava, S., Minna, J. D. & Gazdar,
A. F. (1997) J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 89(18), 13661373.

7. Mao, L., Lee, J. S., Kurie, J. M., Fan, Y. H., Lippman, S. M., Lee,
J. J., Ro, J. Y., Broxson, A., Yu, R., Morice, R. C., et al. (1997)
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 89, 857862.

8. Saccomano, G., Archer, V., Auerbach, O., Saunders, R. P. &

Bennan, L. M. (1974) Cancer 33, 256270.

9. Belinsky, S. A., Foley, J. F., White, C. M., Anderson, M. W. &

Maronpot, R. R. (1990) Cancer Res. 50, 37723780.

10. Levi, S., Urgano-Ispizua, A., Gill, R., Thomas, D. M., Gilbertson,
T. J., Foster, C. & Marshall, C. J. (1991) Cancer Res. 51,
34973502.

11. Herman, J. G., Graff, J. R., Myohannen, S., Nelkin, B. D. &
Baylin, S. B. (1996) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93, 98219826.
12. Koss, L. G. (1992) Diagnostic Cytology and Its Histopathologic

Bases. (Philadelphia: Lippincott), 4th Ed., Vol.1.

13. Xiao, S., Daizong, L., Corson, J. M., Vijg, J. & Fletcher, J. A.

(1995) Cancer Res. 55, 29682971.

14. Belinsky, S. A., Swafford, D. S., Middelton, S. K., Kennedy, C. H.

& Tesfaigzi, J. (1997) Carcinogenesis 18, 115120.

15. Kratze, R. A., Greaten, T. M., Rubies, J. B., Maddaus, D. E.,
Niewoehner, G. A., Niehans & Geradts, J. (1996) Cancer Res. 56,
34153420.

16. Otterson, G. A., Khleif, S. N., Chen, W., Coxon, A. B. & Kaye,

F. J. (1995) Oncogene 11, 12111216.

17. Shapiro, G. I., Edwards, C. D., Kobzik, L., Godleski, J., Richards,
W., Sugarbaker, D. & Rollins, B. J. (1995) Cancer Res. 55,
505509.

18. Harpole, D. H., Herndon, J. E., Wolfe, W. G., Iglehart, J. D. &

Marks, J. R. (1995) Cancer Res. 55, 5156.

19. Herman, J. G., Civin, C. I., Issa, J.-P. J., Collector, M. I., Sharkis,

S. J. & Baylin, S. B. (1997) Cancer Res. 57, 837841.

20. Tong, L., Spitz, M. R., Fueger, J. J. & Amos, C. I. (1996) Cancer

78, 10041010.

21. Auerbach, O., Stout, A. P., Hammond, E. C. & Garfinkel, L.

(1962) N. Eng. J. Med. 267, 119125.

22. Anderson, M., Sladon, S., Michels, R., Davidson, L., Conwell, K.,
II, Lechner, J., Franklin, W., Saccomanno, G. & Wiest, J. (1996)
J. Cell Biochem. 64, 185190.

23. Zhou, J., Jensen, S. M., Steinberg, S. M., Mulshine, J. L. &

Linnoila, R. I. (1996) Lung Cancer 14, 8597.

